notes_vowel_system.md, before:

## Vowel harmony in Mongolian
&nbsp;

- seven vowels i, e, a, o, O, u, ʊ. Classified as :
    - pharyngeal/tense/ATR: i, e, u, o
    - non-pharyngeal/lax: a, ʊ, O.
- i -- no lax counterpart

Harmony:

1. Rounding
2. ATR

Initial phonemes: specified. Non-initial: archiphonemes: /i/, /U/, /E/

Alternations: 

• /E/: /e/, /a/, /o/, /O/ (ATR, rounding)

• /U/: /u/, /ʊ/ (ATR)

---
### ATR

\** /i/ in the initial syllable forces the
following vowels in the non-compound word to be
[+ATR]. Otherwise: if it comes between two vowels, doesn't *block* harmony (transparent, not opaque)

Otherwise:

- Trigger vowels: o, O, u, ʊ, a, e (in initial positions)

- Target vowels: Archiphonemes /E/ and /U/

---
### Rounding
If initial vowel = /u/ or /ʊ/, then following: compulsarily unrounded (e, a)

\** /u/ and /ʊ/-- not affected by rounding harmony, + block it if they come between trigger and target (opaque) (make the following vowel compulsoriy unrounded-- e,a)

Otherwise:

- Trigger vowels: /o/, /O/

- Target vowels: Archiphoneme /E/



&nbsp;  

---

\** Noninitial /i/ in Mongolian is transparent, i.e., it is completely ignored by vowel harmony 

---

&rarr; ignore words with initial /i/, if only 2 syllables

Commit message:

transcription notes, add harmony types

notes_vowel_system.md, after:

## Vowel harmony in Mongolian
&nbsp;

- seven vowels i, e, a, o, O, u, ʊ. Classified as :
    - pharyngeal/tense/ATR: i, e, u, o
    - non-pharyngeal/lax: a, ʊ, O.
- i -- no lax counterpart

Harmony:

1. Rounding
2. ATR

Initial phonemes: specified. Non-initial: archiphonemes: /i/, /U/, /E/

Alternations: 

• /E/: /e/, /a/, /o/, /O/ (ATR, rounding)

• /U/: /u/, /ʊ/ (ATR)

---
### ATR

\** /i/ in the initial syllable forces the
following vowels in the non-compound word to be
[+ATR]. Otherwise: if it comes between two vowels, doesn't *block* harmony (transparent, not opaque)

Otherwise:

- Trigger vowels: o, O, u, ʊ, a, e (in initial positions)

- Target vowels: Archiphonemes /E/ and /U/

---
### Rounding
If initial vowel = /u/ or /ʊ/, then following: compulsarily unrounded (e, a)

\** /u/ and /ʊ/-- not affected by rounding harmony, + block it if they come between trigger and target (opaque) (make the following vowel compulsoriy unrounded-- e,a)

Otherwise:

- Trigger vowels: /o/, /O/

- Target vowels: Archiphoneme /E/



&nbsp;  

---

\** Noninitial /i/ in Mongolian is transparent, i.e., it is completely ignored by vowel harmony 

---

### Rounding harmony:
Only concerns open vowels (e, a, o, O)

o and O -- can occur freely in the initial syllable

In non-initial syllable: o and O can occur ONLY if the initial vowel is also round and low, i.e. the same (o or O). 

But not the other way round: Not the case that if the first vowel is o or O, the following ones obligatorily have to be round. They can be anything. But not quite 'anything', there's a catch:

o can be followed by anything (anything non-pharyngeal, i.e. /e/), but O cannot be followed /a/. So O can only be followed by O (among the open vowels; not concerned with high vowels here)

i --> transparent for rounding harmony

if there is an u or U, any *open* vowels following them must be *non-round* (parallel to how any vowel folling /i/ must be non-pharyngeal)
